1. Date, time and string functions

Oftentimes, data in columns of tables is not in the exact format we need to complete our desired analysis. We may need to extract a date from a full timestamp, manipulate a number, or combine first and last name columns to create a full name.

In this lesson, we'll be learning about some of SQL's built-in functions for transforming dates, numbers and strings. We'll be using database of bakeries in this lesson.

It is important to note that date, number, and string functions are highly database dependent. Here, we focus on built-in functions in the SQLite database management system.
___________________________________
Select ten rows from the bakeries table.

select *
from bakeries
limit 10;

__________________________
________________________
2.Dates
We'll begin with dates. Dates are often written in the following format

1. Date: YYYY-MM-DD

2. Datetime or Timestamp: YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss

We can use SQL's date functions to transform data into a desired format. Since date functions can be database specific, verify the functions that exist on your relational database management system.

For example, this statement

SELECT DATETIME(manufacture_time)
FROM baked_goods;

Would return the date and time for the manufacture_time column.
_______________________
Using the datetime function, select the date and time of all deliveries in the baked_goods table using the column delivery_time.

select datetime(delivery_time)
from baked_goods;
____________________
___________________
3. Dates 2
Nice work! Now let's assume that we have a column in our baked_goods table named manufacture_time in the format YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss.

We'd like to know the number of baked_goods manufactured by day, and not by second. We can use the DATE() function to easily convert timestamps to dates and complete the following query:

SELECT DATE(manufacture_time), count(*) as count_baked_goods
FROM baked_goods
GROUP BY DATE(manufacture_time);

Similarly, we can query the time with

SELECT TIME(manufacture_time), count(*) as count_baked_goods
FROM baked_goods
GROUP BY TIME(manufacture_time);
____________________________
Find the number of baked goods by date of delivery.

Be sure to alias the total count of baked goods as count_baked_goods

SELECT date(delivery_time), count(*) as count_baked_goods
FROM baked_goods
GROUP BY date(delivery_time);
_________________
_________________
4. Dates 3
Given a datepart and a column of date or timestamp data type, we can increment date or timestamp values by a specified interval.

For example, in SQLite, the statement

DATETIME(time1, '+3 hours', '40 minutes', '2 days');
Would return a time 3 hours, 20 minutes, and 2 days after time1.

Imagine that each dessert in ourbaked_goods table is inspected 2 hours, 30 minutes, and 1 day after the manufacture time. To derive the inspection date for each baked good, we can use the following query

SELECT DATETIME(manufacture_time, '+2 hours', '30 minutes', '1 day') as inspection_time
FROM baked_goods;
___________________________________
Each of the baked goods is packaged by Baker's Market exactly five hours, twenty minutes, and two days after the delivery (designated by delivery_time). Create a query returning all the packaging times for the goods in the baked_goods table

Be sure to alias the package time column as package_time.

SELECT DATETIME(delivery_time, '+5 hours', '20 minutes', '2 day') as package_time
FROM baked_goods;
________________________
_______________________
5. Numbers

Great work! Numeric functions can be used to transform numbers. Some common SQLite mathematical functions are included below that take numeric data types as inputs:

SELECT (number1 + number2);: Returns the sum of two numbers. Similar, SQL can be used for subtraction, multiplication, and division.
SELECT CAST(number1 AS REAL) / number3;: Returns the result as a real number by casting one of the values as a real number, rather than an integer.

SELECT ROUND(number, precision);: Returns the numeric value rounded off to the next value specified.
In our baked_goods table, we have information about cost designated by ingredients_cost. For accounting purposes, we'd like to make sure that each ingredient cost is rounded to four decimal places rather than two, to account for currency fluctuations.

SELECT ROUND(ingredients_cost, 4) as rounded_cost
FROM baked_goods;
_____________________
Find the bakery's distance from the market rounded to two decimal places.

Be sure to alias the column as distance_from_market.

SELECT ROUND(distance, 2) as distance_from_market
FROM bakeries;
_________________
_________________
6. Numbers 2

A couple more useful numeric SQL functions are included below: MAX and MIN.

MAX(n1,n2,n3,...): returns the greatest value in the set of the input numeric expressions MIN(n1,n2,n3,...): returns the least value in the set of the input numeric expressions

In our baked_goods table, in addition to the numeric ingredients_cost we have information about the packaging cost located in the packaging_cost column. We can use the MAX function to determine the overall greatest value of cost for each item using the following query:

SELECT id, MAX(ingredients_cost, packaging_cost)
FROM baked_goods;
__________________
We also have information about cook time designated as cook_time and cool down time designated as cool_down_time in the baked_goods table. Find the greatest time value for each item in the table.

SELECT id, MAX(cook_time, cool_down_time)
FROM baked_goods;
___________________
Find the least time value for each item in the table.

SELECT id, Min(cook_time, cool_down_time)
FROM baked_goods;
______________________
________________________
7 String
String manipulation can be useful to derive information from columns. We'll cover a couple of the common string functions here.

A common use case for string manipulation in SQL is concatenation of strings. In SQLite, this is written as

SELECT string1 || ' ' || string2;
For example, the bakeries table contains both city and state columns. In order to create a route for these columns, we use the || function to concatenate them as in the following query:

SELECT city || ' ' || state as location
FROM bakeries;
String functions are again, very database specific, and it is best practice to consult documentation before proceeding.
_________________________--
Combine the first_name and last_name columns from the bakeries table as the full_name to identify the owners of the bakeries.

Be sure to add a space between the names in the full_name as shown in the example.
SELECT first_name || ' ' || last_name as full_name
FROM bakeries;
____________________
_____________________
8. Strings 2

Another useful string function in SQL is REPLACE():

REPLACE(string,from_string,to_string)
The function returns the string string with all occurrences of the string from_string replaced by the string to_string.

For example in baked_goods, there is a column named ingredients. The ingredients strings are formatted with underscores, such as baking_soda and vanilla_extract. To make these values more readable, we might like to replace the underscores with spaces. We can do so by using the following query:

SELECT id, REPLACE(ingredients,'_',' ') as item_ingredients
from baked_goods;
________________________________
Any time enriched_flour appears in the ingredients list, we’d like to replace it with just flour. Apply this transformation and also be sure to remove the underscore in enriched_flour.

SELECT REPLACE(ingredients,'enriched_',' ') as item_ingredients
FROM baked_goods;
____________________________
_________________________

9. Congratulations! You just learned about date, number, and string functions in SQL. What can we generalize so far?

Date Functions:

DATETIME; Returns the date and time of the column specified. This can be modified to return only the date or only the time.
DATETIME(time1, +X hours, Y minutes, Z days): Increments the specificed column by a given number of hours, minutes, or days.
Numeric Functions:

(number1 + number2);: Returns the sum of two numbers, or other mathematical operations, accordingly.
CAST(number1 AS REAL) / number2;: Returns the result as a real number by casting one of numeric inputs as a real number
ROUND(number, precision);: Returns the numeric value rounded off to the next value specified.
String Functions:

'string1' || ' ' || 'string2';: Concatenates string1 and string 2, with a space between.
REPLACE(string,from_string,to_string): Returns the string with all occurrences of the string from_string replaced by the string to_string.